s3 stands for simple storage service
it is used to store files, object based storage
files are stored in bucket
bucket contains a dns address.file should contain a unique name to create unique dns address.
create bucket->create unique file->dns address is issued->each object can be retrieved by a unique key
s3 is key value object pair.

key- file name
value- data inside a file
version id- string generated by s3 when we add an object
metadata-data about data what we storing

key , bucket , regions, objects, data consistency model
bucket->object->key->region->data consistency model(high availability , multiple servers)

cross region multiplication - replicates data from one data bucket to different data bucket in different region

lifecycle management- 
transition actions(archive 30 days),expiration action(delete)

computer delivery network(cdn)-When the first user requests to get the content, and the request goes to the nearest edge location.
The nearest edge will be read first to determine whether it contains the cached data or not. 
If an edge does not contain the cached data, the edge location pulls the data from the S3 bucket. 
Suppose the S3 bucket is in Ireland. 
But this process is not quicker for the first user. 
However, when the second user accesses the same file, this file is already cached to the edge location, so it pulls the data from its edge location. 
It speeds up the delivery of the data.

ec2 stands for amazon elastic compute cloud
thats help you to reduce costs by allowing to use your own existing server bound software licenses
ie vmware, oracle,sql server .
ec2 is a virtual machine in a cloud which reduces cost and tinme.

ebs-elastic block store
ebs is virtual disk in cloud
ebs is allowed to create storage 
ebs does not exist on one disk it is spread across the zone.

snowball

load balancer- balances web application load either http or https 

types of load balancer-
1)application load balancer-dedicated server
2)network -doesnt identify header
3)classic- identify header and only work with dedicated server port

iaas,paas

lambda-lambda is a compute service where we can upload code and create lambda function.
it is used as an event driven compute service where aws lambda runs code in response to events
user upload an image to s3
s3 triggers event , this event is lambda function
lambda function takes this image and then encode the image , then it is stored in s3

cloud watch is used to collect and track metrics that measure resources and applications.

logs
alarms
dashboards
aurora- database  engine in aws,replicas

redshift is data warehouse service in the cloud

olap(online analytics prcosseing system)

redshift is a collection of computing resources knows as nodes and nodes as organisez as cluster,
Columnar Data Storage
Instead of storing data as a series of rows, Amazon Redshift organizes the data by column. Row-based systems are ideal for transaction processing while column-based systems are ideal for data warehousing and analytics, where queries often involve aggregates performed over large data sets

events
in non relation databse, recors are stored in the form of json format.

non relation database types-
1)key value
2)document'3)graph
4)in memory
5)search

dynamo db is nosql databse service that require single digit milisecond latency 
it support both document , key value models.


Amazon Redshift automatically distributes the data and loads the query across various nodes. An Amazon Redshift makes it easy to add new nodes to your data warehouse, and this allows us to achieve faster query performance as your data warehouse grows.

aws application services-
1)sqs
2)swf
3)sns
4)elatic transcoder
5)gateway
6)kinesis
