azure is completely based on concept of virtualization.

webapi->orchestrator(authenticate)->fabric controller(monitor and repairs the services)->racks

public cloud - when we buy azure services it is used by third party ex storage , web services software
private cloud - when we buy azure services it is used by company and the data is stored on company onsite datacentre

hybrid - combination of public and private cloud

types of cloud services-

iaas(infrastructure as service)- managing serviers , vm machine all we can use in one platform
saas(software as service)- provide wev services like microsoft services to end users
paas(platform as service)- provide developer a platform to develop, test and deliver , where they can deploy and run it.

azure portal is a place where we can manage all azure application at one place.

azure storage builing blocks-
blob-it is used to stored unstructed data such as media , files and documents
azure files-share files between two vm
archive-unused files into archive
azure queues-it is used to store messages(queues)
azure table- no sql
azure disk storage
azure storsimple
azure site recovery
azure data box
azure backup
cdn

azure repository- a multiple branch will be created , each branch represents version of code and each developer has access to code
pipeline-perform continuous ci and cd , build pipeline and perform release to the same pipeline.
board- customisable boards and integrated reporting used to see the backlogs and in progresss boards.

test plan - it provides test plan for which kind of test we are going to undergo.

artifacts- it checks the dependency for the different environment.
azure devops-
boards for agile planning
artifacts for version control
cicd for continous deployment
test integration for continous lifecycle process.

azure repository is set of version control tools we use to manage our code.

repository- location of our code
branch-branch keeps history of commit and provides option of isolation commit for 
bugs and fixes from main branch.
branch policies- helps in from protecting main branches.
pull command updates the changes in code .
pust and commit-a commint is saving .
fork-copy of the branch

pipeline-means how to deploy test and run 
stage- boundary in pipeline .each stage contains one or two jobs.
job -set of steps.it runs on agents
step- smallest builing block of pipeline. it can be either scipt or test. test is already script

agents is running one job at a time and agent pool is where all agent is stored.

artifacat - collection of files and pacages.

trigger-schedule the pipeline when to run.After pushing code in pipeline we can scheduled when to run by help of trigger.

checks- set of validation required before deployment.
runs-it collects log

azure function - we use azure function in order to write less code , manage less infrastructure and saves time.

durable function - it is used to create stateful functions.we can create orchestrator function to mange flow of workflows , including storing and accessing different state across platform.

function chaining
fan-out/fan-in
async http apis


azure databse services for data migration
azure data migration service
azure data syn
sql streth database
data factory- it is used for etl transformation. extract etl from on premises and load into azure sql

cosmos db- nosql databse ex iot and gaming
azure sql support json, spatial and xml

sql databse logical server- it acts as administrative point for multiole single or pooled database logins

elastic pools- managing databse more than one.scaling and managing them into one.

cosmos db-
index searching and no schema

in cosmos db we do logical partioning where we distrivute data data in container with one partioning key

d\azure data factory-
pipeline
actvity
datasets-use datastructures with data stores for i/o outputs
triggers- to disable an activity in pipeline.

scan/aggregation
load
create table as select(ctas)
mssynctable

api manaement portals
product-each product contain many apis
`
scale in 
scale out

azure app service secuirty
authentication(tokens), authorization

arm

cdn location (caching)

assets contain digital files and metadata
assestsfile-it contain metadata
locators-it provides an entry point to acces the file contained in asset
job-it us used to process one audio/video presentation
channels-live streaming programs
program-publishing and storing of segments
streaming endpoint-it represents a streaming service that delivers content

activr directory- it is used to who can access virtual machines
key vault- it is used to store sensitive info in azure

auto scaling- once the cpu utlization is highes than 80 percent then spin off a new instnace
horizontally scaling0 increasing or decreasing vm
vertical scaling- more powerful cpu in vm

ddos protection- protect vm from ddos
firewall
traffic manager-controls user traffic for service endpoints
load balancer- distribute the traffic evenly a pool of web servers

peering is used to coonect two vnets in same region and same zones

vpn gateway - And if the workloads in those virtual networks need to communicate with each other, they will communicate via this encrypted channel of communication between the VPN gateways of both virtual network

sas 
contianer is like folder where blobs are stored.
in container we can personalized blob storage
snapshot - read only version , for example if we are devloping youtube like function then we can retain older version too

logging is ises to monitor an individual transactions

apache spark is popular dramework for large data analysis for big data.

databricks is a integration for apacke spark helps in data visualizing of big data.
dbfs- acces data from blob storage.it is like a abstration layer.
orchestrator includes web apis to do crud operation
