what is an staging area in etl ?
staging area or loading phase is an intermediate phase before transformation occurs.It holds raw data from various data sources before any transformations.it performs checks on data and clean data.
it is used to process large quantity of data and make ready data for transformation.

How do you handle incremental data loading?

data loading means loading only those records which are updated or a new record without loading all the record at a time.
this changes optimises time and reduce resource usgae-
there are two technique
1)cdc- it uses database triggers, logs to identify the latest records
2) timestamp

metadata is information about data itself. it store the data in organized form 
also it tells about data history , who is owing the data , what kind of data it is,
who has permission to use the data and when it is created , what is the version for data.

data cube is a collection of data which is stored inside warehousing.it contain large amount of
data stored inside the warehouse. it can be multidimensional .data can be stored multidimensional
as an form of array where it is easier to index and retreive also perform olap transactions.

it is also relational based data stored in it where tables are stored in relation to each other.

snowflake schema- fact table - > dimension table->sub dimensional table.
star schema- fact table- dimension table

some data warehouse solution are-
snowflakes, hadoop, aws redshift

data mining - where data is in collected form and used to find pattern in order to find
analysis and see trends to use those data for future pupose. complex algorithm is used
to see the pattern and use thhose data(extracting). ex- retail and supermarkets whats user is shopping.

active data warehousing- collect data and do transaction and distribute in real time.
ex trading.

Types of data warehousing-
1)enterprise data warehouse
2) ods
3) data mart- dependent , independednt . hybrid

fact contain  numeric and textual format, dimension contain only textual info
table grow vertically , table grow horizontaly
first dimension is created then fact is create.

types of scd
type 1- replaces the old value
type 2- creates new row for the value-
type3 - create new column for the value
(customer address , description )
junk , conformed(exactly same dimension ie car color , style ), roleplay(same dimension key linked to dieffretn foreign key(time , order day, ship day)), degenrate (dimension in fact table ie ticket number , transaction number)

dimension table . It includes a column that serves as a primary key, allowing each dimension row or record to be uniquely identified. Through this key, it is linked to the fact tables. When it's constructed, a system-generated key called the surrogate key is used to uniquely identify the rows in the dimension.


types of fact table-
transactional- one transactional per row
snapshot - add new row at a end of each day, week , month or specified interval
accumulating- well defined beginning and end. data stamps over course of lifespam.

agglomerative - unstructured clustering , combining all cluster into one.

divisive- define number of clusters 


how you will create fact and dimension table-

business requirement
identify grain
identify dimenion
identify fact
identify schema

levels of data warehousing-
source->staging area->warehouse->data marts->mining








